INTRODUCTION xxv

at one time known as the Bibliothdque Royale. The indications
above mentioned make it quite clear that this could not have been
the lost Fallerone MS. from which Rinaldi took his transcript‚
though it is not at all unlikely that in his work he may have con-
sulted this Codex and have made corrections from it.

Before leaving the consideration of this version it must be noted
that the Paris MS„ like that of Montpellier, is incomplete, the
difference however being that while the latter has the last few
folios missing the Paris codex is lacking in the first few. The text
commences with the words :—

“lntrinsicus ad amicis‚'’ etc„ which occur about the 4th line
of the chapter entitled, “ Qualiter pater eius persequens ligavit eum.’'

From this point forward the document is complete and even
ends with an important colophon, evidently part of the original
work and which runs as follows :—

“Apud Perusium Felix Dominus papa Gregorius nonus
secundo gloriosi Pontificus sui Anno quinto Kal Marcii legendam
hanc recepit, confirmavit et Censuit fore tenendam. Gratias
omnipotenti deo Salvatori nostris super omnia dona sua nunc et
per omne seculum A.M.E.N.”

The date mentioned would be February 25, 1229.

9, W drzhurg MS.—This is another of the hitherto unrecorded
copies of Celano’s first work, and has probably remained unknown
owing to the fact that it appears in no catalogue, in consequence of
which I had the greatest possible difficulty in discovering it.

The learned authorities of the University Library knew
nothing of it, but l was eventually fortunate enough to find a
reference to it at the end of a manuscript docket‚ and was then soon
face to face with what is, apparently, another of the MSS. from
which Rinaldi copied the first part of his text.

It is necessary to say the first part, for the MS. only goes as
far as the second chapter of Book ll. We have in this Codex
a very early edition. It has been asserted by a former librarian
that this MS. is a 13th century document, and if so, of great
interest. In many respects it seems to correspond with the
London copy, and I am inclined to believe that they are related
to each other.

The student who wishes to consult the MS. will find it under
MP. Th., folio 107, in the University Library. The volume itself
is of the usual folio size, with a beautiful 17th century vellum
Ἰ binding and clasps. lt contains 105 folios-1-89 containing 11 out
of 12 books entitled Speculum Virginum [a dialogue between
c

 

