INTRODUCTION xvii

of the cover there occurs but one line, in a 14th century hand, and
it runs as follows :-

“Iste liber est sanctae Mariae Virginis in Salem.’'

And immediately after this follows :-

“Interpres regulae S. Basilii Episcopi, etc., . F olios r· 54
DeVitaS.Galli, . . . . „ 55-99
Vita etvirtutemde beati Otmar, . . ‚, 99-117
Vita S. Francisci, . . . . ,‚ 118-150
DeVita S. Dominici‚ . . . „ 151-170
De Passio longini marturis,. . . „ 170.172
De Vita Fratris Hugoni de Tennebach . „ 173.180'’

Thus the MS. by Celano consists of 33 folios since one is
unnumbered. It is written by several hands, and mensures
258><130 millimetres. At first it reminds the student of the
Evreux MS„ though belonging to an earlier period3 it is therefore
not surprising to learn that the source of this work Was the Cis-
tercian Monastery of Salem or Salmansweiler‚ at one time in all
probability the richest monastery in Europe. This rich stronghold

of the Cistercian monks was founded in the year 630 by Salman or
Soloman, under the reign of Gunzo, Duke of snauh, in whose
country it was situated. The name of the founder, who is known
to have been a man of great piety‚ has lived in the name of the
monastery he founded. This community, after passing through
many vicissitudes, under its fortieth Abbot, by name Caspar
Oexle, during the reign of Pope Pius VII., was secularised‚
and in 1803 ceased to exist. The contents of its valuable
library were conveyed to Heidelberg, and have in consequence
made the latter a library of no mean position. This text is
beautifully written. ⁴

4. London (Harlry) Mu-tn our own country we are able to
boast of at least two Franciscan treasures. We possess two copies of t„ ds
Thomas of Celano’s first work. One of these is the London MSS.„.2·3‘{‚
which is to be found in the Manuscript Department of the British l
Museum, under “ Harl. 47,'' and the other is at C.C.C.‚ Oxford.

The volume under consideration is a collection of separate
MSS„ four in all, but the first two are probably related.

¹ The title-page has inscribed upon it asort of index, which

reads as follows :—

 

