lNTRODUCTlON xxxiii

the author of a work himself could do. Hence we find that whilst
in certain cases there is an almost servile repetition of whole
chapters, in other parts not only words are altered but whole
passages of considerable length are inserted and others are taken
out. Some chapters are placed in a different order, and in other
cases left out. Moreover, in addition to these differences, this work
contains a new account of the Canonization and a most elaborate
version of the Miracles, which latter constitutes nearly half of
the volume, and is, be it noted, not an addition to, but an essential
part of the work.

The precious possession of Ρὲ10 Louis Antoine de Porrentruy,
which is the only extant copy of the Vita Secunda or Tractmns
Secundus of which we are aware, is a volume for which we cannot
be too grateful, and the fact that this copy of the work is avery
late one, probably as late as the beginning of the Ι 5th century, may ,
very possibly account for the omission of the introductory letter,
“Religiosa nostra solicitudo.” In addition to this‚‘the small
dimensions 01 the volume, though somewhat larger than that of
Amisi, indicate the fact that both these veryprecious reeords were .
reproduced under a certain amount of secrecy and would naturally
not contain anything of no importance to those days, or that seemed
unnecessary. Hence, perhaps, the non-insertion of the covering
letter.

Such, then, is the view that my studies on this subject have led
me to, and hence I venture to place before the F ranciscan students
of this country the lives of St. Francis by Thomas of Celano, in three
parts, the Legenda Gregorii and the Legenda Antiqua constituting
the first life, and the Marselles or Boncompagni MS. constituting
the second life.

These works however do not complete our author’s literary
productione, for besides these writings we know that he drew upa
first and second series of nine lessons for the Brothers, whilst the
Legend os St. Clara is also attributed to Thomas of Celano.

Ι shall indeed feel that something has been aecomplished if this
work tends to create a wider interest in aiield that, owing to the
difficulty of obtaining texts of any sort, hasbeen hitherto relegated
to the few.

I am convinced that a deeper and more critical study of these
writings will lead students more and more to see in the work and
life of St. Francis a very different man from the one which the con-
ventional biographers have attempted to portray.

Especially to Professor Sabatier and to Mr. Dent d0 I wish to
d

 

