xxii THOMAS OF CELANO

taius some of the additions and omissions in which the Amoni-
Rinaldi edition differs from the other Codices.

Still side by side with curious fact, there are differences and
peculiarities about the MS. that make it utterly dissimilar to all
other versions. It may have been the work of a late copyist, who
attempted to improve on the original text3 it may have been a
copy of some other version at present unknown, or it may have
been of still earlier and more important origin, but the weight of
expett opinion is against this latter view. The size ol the folio
is 296 χ 210 millimetres‚ and the writing is in two columns of
about 53 lines each. The abbreviations are very numerous¹

The whole concludes with “Benedictio et honor et omnis laus,
etc. Amen.'’

I am greatly indebted to Father To'lg for his courtesy to me
during my visit to Ossegg, and most of all for his willingness to
lend me so interesting and valuable a document.

7. Oxsord M S.—This very early and interesting Codex is to he „
found at Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and in the library of that
college is known as Codex 202.

The paper page facing folio 1 has the following entry in the
well-known and beautiful handwriting of William Fullman, the

donor and sometime librarian :—

“Liber C.C.C., Oxon. Ex dono Guilli Fullman, AM.³
hujus collegii quandam socii.

No. 1669—202, E. 1-16.
Vita S. Francisci, P. 1.
, Alia est ab illa quam scripsit Bonaventura3 qui tamen hanc
vidisse et exscripsisse videtur.

Regula S. Augustini, Ρ. 120.
Expositio Regulae S. Augustini, P. 129. Ab Hugone de
S. Victore. ⁴

Ext. MS. in Bibl. C.C.C. licet in fine quaedam disiderantur
quae hic habes, P. 181.”

The MS. itself is not so well written as most of the others, and
is of varying quality in style and form. Many copyists seem to
have been at work upon it, at anyrate in those folios which refer
to the life of St. Francis.

The size and character of this MS. tend to the assumption
that it was one of those transcribed not earlier than the second

part of the 13th century, when the works of Thomas of Celano
were under an interdict3 for it is evidently a hurried work and

 

