xxxii THOMAS OF CELANO

As however the Legenda Antiqua was not to he presented to a
Pope but to “a Religious‚” with characteristic perspicuhy, and
perhaps with a certain amount of sincerity‚ Thomas of Celauo
took the opportunity to conclude many of his chapters with a
sermonette expressing his own opinions on St. Francis, some of
which look as if they may have had even an ulterior meaning and
were intended to emphasise some aspect of the many controversies
raging at the time.

These two documents, the Legenda Gregorii and the Legenda
Antiqua, constituted the “first life,'’ and ii this supposition be
accepted) and Ι venture to think that no other view will contradict
it), the writing on the title page of MS. oso, Amisi, in a modern
hand, probably that of Papini, will have to be understood as
inserted by mistake and in consequence of a very natural error of
judgment‚ at a time when the real Vita Secunda was undiscovered ;
a mistake following from the assumption by Riualdi and Antoni that
the Appendiu dd Vitam Primam was the sameas the V ita Secunda.

This becomes more apparent when we notice that the Legenda
Antiqua (MS. 686, Assisi) commences, as it should do, with the
covering letter, “Placuit Sancti Universitati Vestre‚” aud as the
Vita Secunda was as we know, accompanied hy the eoveriug letter,
“Religiosa nostra solicitudo,'' it becomes at once evident that,
whatever else the MS. at Assisi may be, it cannot well he the
Vita Secunda.

where, then, we may go on to ask is the Liber pulcherrimus taen
de Mracalis quam de Vita quenz appelavit M emariala beati Francisci in
desideria aniene of which Salembene speaks i

I think there can be little doubt that in the Boncompagni MS.
we have a copyof this long-missing recital alluded to by Salembene‚
which Jordanus calls the Legenda Secunda and which the author of
the XXIV. Generals calls Secundus Truentus.

The render might at first bedisposed to consider that the Tractatus
Secundus, as we may now call the Boncompagni MS, is merely the
Legenda Antiqua with the Miracles added, but a more careful study =
will show that in reality the differences are too great.

Naturally in writing a full second life the author draws upon
the facts that have gone before, and l cannot doubt that in conse-
quence of some criticism of the Legenda Antiqua, that work had not
achieved that degree of publicity which Celano would have wished
for it, so that when the opportunity of giving his Magnum
Opus to the world had come, he drew largely upon the previous

work which was so little known, altering and adapting it as only

 

