INTRODUCTION xxxi

folios being in one hand the remainder in another, but they both
are beautifully executed, clear and legible.

I take the opportunity of thanking Frdre Edouard d’Alenpon,
in whose charge it is now placed, for his kindness and courtesy in
giving me every assistance in his power.

This valuable discovery proved to be the missing work.
Nothing less than the real Secundus Tractatns and the Pnlcherrirnas
liber by Thomas of Celano.

The book lacks the covering letter, “Religiosa nostra
solicitudo’'; but it is not altogether strange when we realise
that this particular Codex must have been copied towards the end
of the 14th or even in the first part of the 15th century. At
first sight the earlier 39 folios seem to be only a repetition of
the Assisi version, but a more careful comparison will show that
there are very great differences‚ whole chapters are left out and
whole chapters put in, whilst the 'characteristic sermonettes
which adom the Assisi Codex are in nearly every case either
removed or curtailed in the Boncompagni version. This Codex
contains a short account of the Canonization, and finally
another 35 pages consisting of the complete tractate on the
miracles for which John of Parma had asked.

In the light of this document we are able to understand the
real meaning and scope of the various Codices.

The first work which we know is that called the Vita Prima,
and was written in 1228-1229 and 1244-1247, for this Vita Prima
consisted of two parts, known respectively as Legenda Gregorii and
Legenda Antiqua. The work which has hitherto been known as
Vna Prinna and which for convenience sake l will call by its older
name of Legenda Gregorii, since it was written at the direction of
that Pope, must have obtained wide circulation. So widely was it
studied that it went far beyond the limits of the Order, until even
the terrible decree of the Council of Paris could not effectually
put an end to its existence. This will account for the many
versions still extant, many of which are written in full on large-
sized fullos, which formed part of the recognised treasures oi
monastic houses all over Europe.

As we have seen, in 1244-1247, Crescentius de Jesu, Minister
General of the Order, directed our author to complete his work,
which he did under the title of an appendix to the first life, and

3 very naturally, as he had already inserted the Canonization and
3 the Miracles in the Legenda Gregorii, he abstained from purting
η thern into the second part or appendix.

 

