xiv THOMAS OF CELANO

“benedictio et honor et omnis laus sit soli sapienti deo qui ad
gloriam suam semper omnia in omnibus sapientissime
operatur. amen amen amen.’⁷

This work was originally the possession of the Monastery of
Ripoll‚ and in the catalogue of that library it was No. 61.

It is a particularly interesting Codex, since it is upon this
version that Frere Edouard dnlenpon is basing the text which, he
has informed me, be has in preparation.

The MS. is written in two columns, each containing 36 lines
The rubrications and the capital letters are slightly more elaborate
than the London Codex, and in consequence are, in my opinion, of
a slightly later date, whilst the concluding words remove all
possible suggestion of this having been the work of Thomas of
Celano himself.

2. Evreux ars-The original of this document will be found at
the “Bibliothdque Municipal‚’' situated at the “Mairie.'' The .
life of St. Francis is the last but one of the series of MSS.
entitled “MS. 111, Opuscula Varia ”3 the whole series is bound
together between wooden boards (the front cover broken) and is
vellum covered. The volume contains 129 folios‚ and is divided
as follows:-

F. 1-2. Copies of three Bulls of innocent ΙΙΙ.

F. 3a-29a. Severi Sulpicii diologi tres de virtutibus Sancti
Martini.

F. zob-3oa. Epistola ejusdem ad Eusebium, etc.

F. 3ob-32b. Epistola ejusdem ad Aurelium diaconem.

F. 33a-67b. Glosa in Evangelium secundnm Joannem.

F. blla-oza. Petri Lombardi sententiarum.

F. 9311. Blank page.

F. 93h-128b. Vita beati F rancisci patris Minorum Actus et
Vitam beatissimi patris nostri, etc.

F. raon-end. Historia de excidio Troje‚ etc.

The whole collection is described in the catalogue as a 13th
century parchment, and from a certain reference at the end it
might seem to be almost a 12th century document 3 but on closer
examination it will be found that the 36 folios which comprise the
work of Celano are of a much later date. In the first place, unlike
tlte whole of the rest of the book, as well as unlike all the other copies
of the Legenda Gregorii, it is not written in two columns, but is

 

