INTRODUCTION xxiii

intended to be of sufficiently small dimensions to avoid detection
should a search be instituted.

The leaves of this little volume are 153x113 millimctres in
size. The binding is a more or less modern one, probably of the
17th century. This precious possession of C.C.C. has 81 leaves,
but they are not all of vellum3 wherever there are pages missing
their place has been supplied by paper equivalents.

The history of the MS. is unknown3 but we are aware that
it was presented to the library by William Fullman, who was
himself a great antiquarian, and the various portioris were evidently
bound together by him and the pages numbered, alas, wrongly
numbered‚ by another hand. Unfortunately‚ too, the numbers are
placed on both sides of each folio instead of on the recto side
only, and in addition all the inserted sheets are numbered. ,

In Coxe's Catalogue of Oxford MSS. there is a somewhat
full description of this volume, but it has apparently not been
noticed that on page 97 we have in addition to the rule anex-
position of the rule by Pope Gregory which begins in this fashion,
“Incipit expositio Gregoris domini super regulam beati Francisi.'’
This exposition follows directly upon the mle, and ends with
“Datum Anagni iiij Kal Octobris pontificatus nostri Anno
quart0.''

Immediately at the commencement of page 98 occurs the
Office with the words “ln Natali Sancti Francisci Incipit
Gaudiamus omnes in Domini Dei,” etc„ and concludes at the
bottom of the page with the words, “Venite ad me omnes qui
laboratis et omnes . . .¹'

From a cursory glance at Coxe’s Catalogue‚ it will be seen
that the book is divided as follows ε·-

Ι. The first life of St. Francis by Thomas of celano, in three
parts, pp. 1-94.

H. The Rule of St. F rancis, pp. 95 to middle of 97, and after
13} columns of exposition of the rule by Pope Gregory
(doubtless Gregory IX), we corneto p. 104, which is
a fragment of the Office of St. Francis.

ΠΙ. Then, after several blanlr sheets, the Rule of St. Augus-

‘ tine at p. 1205 and

IV. The exposition of the Rule of St. Augustine at p. 129,
which reminds us strangely of the arrangement of the
British Museum Codex, in which are tractares both on

¹ St. Augustino and St. Bernard.

 

