xx THOMAS OF CELANO

“Passionale vetus Ecclesiae S. Benigni divionensis.
Incipit prologus in passione beatae Katherinae virginis et
martyris.
Passio, etc.’' ;

till near the conclusion, at folio 257, it reaches-
“Vita S. F rancisci.’'

At the end of the title-page appears the additional note-
“Codex MS. Bibliothecqe Buherianae Α. 26 MDCCXXl.''

This latter note refers to the library of a former owner, a
M. Bouhier, who was President ci martiar of the Parliatnent of
Orleans. On his death this treasure, together with many others,

passed to the Monastery of Troyes, and at the Revolution became
the possession of this medical library.

Thanks to the kindness of the Rector of the University of
Montpellier and of the extreme courtesy of Professor champ, the
librarian, I was permitted to photographa portion of the MS.

ln this relation it will be well to refer readers to M. Pertz, Vol.
VII. pp. 195-196, ond to remind them that in this version there
are two principal defens, via, that folios 265 verso and 266 recto
are mutilated at one corner and some of the leaves are transposed,
and in the second place the life is incomplete‚ terminating almost
at the beginning of the chapter entitled “Lamentum fratrum et
gaudium cum eum cernerent signa ferentem crucis; et de alis
Seraphirn,¹' at the words “suspiriis ostendebant‚'' about ten lines
from the above title.

6, Osregg [trs-After travelling to so far-off a library as that of
the Cistercian Monastery of Ossegg in Bohemia, the traveller finds
a building of considerable interest and possessing great antiquarian
interest. This old monastery, which from its foundation in the
vzth century has enjoycd riches and honour as well as peace, is
surrounded with a most beautiful park arrd ornamental grounds.

The buildings are spacious and well worth a visit, but whilst
the picture gallery of this monastery is of sufficient interest to
induce visitors from all parts to find their way to Ossegg, the
library is of a no less interesting character. lt was here that
under the kind guidance of Father Tolg‚ the librarian, I was
shown what seems to rne to be one of the most curious of all
the lives of St. Francis by Celano. This work is contained in a
thick folio volume entitled Liber de Osek. The catalogue in which

 

