xii THOMAS OF CELANO

noticeahle that wherever we find versions of Celano's first work they
are practically the same, and though there are small omissions and
trivial divergencies due to the copyist, the approximation is so
close that, in all instances except one, in the manuscripts Ι have
been able to study, even the capital letters hardly differ.

There are known at the present moment nine manuscript
versions of the Legenda Gregorii by Thomas of Celano, and in
addition to these we have records of two others which are now
lost. The former of these is the version from which Rinaldi
reproduced his text, and which has been followed by Amoni«
The Codex itself was the property of the Brothers of Fallerone in
the March of Ancona, but was stolen by brigands from the Brother
in whose charge it had been placed. ’

The other version, of which we have at present only the
Bollandist text, is said to have belonged to the Cistercian Abbey
of Longpont, in the dioceseos Scissum, though how it came to be
lost is not public property.

It may be that these precious documents will again come to
light3 but the tendency on the part of the Ecclesiastical
authorities, with the single exception oi the Cistercian Order,
has been to obtain and to keep out of sight any of the
early Franciscan manuscripts. This tendency has practically
made it impossible to see, or at any rate to work at, any
documents of the sort that are not in the hands of public bodies
or of the State. Doubtless there are hidden away many precious
treasures of this sort; but until the spirit of the Vatican changes
to a recognition of the tremendous responsibility that their price·
less treasures involve, there will be little hope of making anything
like a complete list of the manuscripts relating to the life either
of St. Francis or of St. Clara of Assisi.

Whilst it would seem that the Ecclesiastical authorities -are
bent on removing any of the versions from the sight or knowledge
of the outside world of ordinary students, we may be grateful that
there are certain manuscripts in existence which, thanks to political
arrd other events, have fallen into the hands of lay communities,and
which are in consequence at the disposal of the world of literature.

Of the nine copies of the Legenda Gregorii at present known, l
have had the privilege of seeing, photographing and studying eight.
Ι hope some day to have the opportunity of completing the series
by visiting the library at Barcelona, where there is to be seen a
version, of which I have, from hearsay, conceived a very high
opinion and which, in the opinion of Fere Deniile, who had not,

 

