INTRODUCTION xiii

however, seen the British hluseum Codex, appeared to be the most
ancient of all the manuscripts. Let us consider thern in order.

1. Barcelona M S.-This version is at the Archivo dc la Corona
de Aragon, and is catalogued under Ripoll No. 41 (Archiv. Vol. Ι.
page 148).

Though I have been unable to collate this valuable MS. from
the original text,l have, nevertheless-thanks to the kindness of
Professor Francesco de Bofarull, the Archivist General-been able
to obtain photographs of the entire 70 pages, and,with the exception
of the Harleian MS. at the British Museum, I feel sure there is no
earlier version. I have the support of several authorities in placing
this Codex in the first half of the 13th century, and it thus becomes
a work of peculiar valuc from a textual point of view.

This Spanish treasure, written in a clear and delicate hand
on parchment, is bound up together with other documents. The
whole volume consisting of 178 folios, it mensures 370><25o
millimetres and deals with the following subjects:-—

Fol. 1 and 2. The decrees of the Chapter General of the
Order held at San Benito in the year 1227.

F ol. 3·34. Liber de penis infernalibus.

Fol.35-105. Incipit liber gestarum Barlaam et Josaphat
servorum Dei, greco sermone editus, aJohanne Dama·
sceno viro sancto et erudito.

Fol. 105-142. Explicit liber de testis Barlaam et Josaphat
servorum Dei. f

Vita Johannis Alexandrinorum antistitis per Leoncium
facta.
Vita Sancti Brendani Abbatis.
F ol. 143-178. Vita Sancti F rancisci.

The particular portion that concerns the reader and consisting
of the concluding 39 folios of the volume, commences with the
words :—

“In Nomine Domini Amen Incipit Prologus super Vitam
beati F rancisci,”

and concludes in the following exceptional way-

“ Poncius exoret Franciscus pro te ut oret
Gloria sit Christe quem liber explicit iste
Finito libro reddatur gratia Christo
Hic liber est scriptus qui scripsit sit benedictus
Qui scripsit scribat per multa tempora vivatfl',

 

