xxiv THOMAS OF CELANO

With the exception of the fact that some of the sheets are
missing in the Oxford version, it seems to me to be one of the
more important and authentic manuscripts, while its small
dimensions indicate an early date when the influence of Bona-
ventura was in the ascendant. The text is curiously similar to the
Harley MS, and suggests the idea that it may have been partly
copied from that version. In shape it reminds us of the Assisi
document, but it is written in two columns, whereas it will be
seen that the latter is written right across the page.

Through the courtesy of the Rev. C. Plummer, l have been
able to obtain some photographs of the text, and I am bound to
acknowledge my indehtedness to him for much valuable assistance
and information.

8. Paris M S.—This MS. is in the Bibliothdque Nationale, and
is MS. No. 3817, Latin. It forms the concluding portion of a collec-
tion of MSS. entitled Humiliae Veterum. The size ot the special
portion under review is 410>< 305 millimettes, and it is written on
vellum in two columns. The other MSS. bound up with this one,
evidently have no relation to it, for the siae of the folios in every
other case is 425 >< 305 millimetres, and the similarity in the width
appears to be due principally to the edge having been trimmed.
That this life of St. Francis has been bound up in this form for
some very considerable time is apparent from the fact that the top
corners of the whole series suffered a certain amount of destruction
some time ago, but since the injury diminishes as the end of the book
is reached, the folios relating to the life of St. Francis have escaped
any material depreciation. Though nearly all the folios have come
in for some curtailing of their top outside corner, the actual writing
has remained untouched, thanks to the thickness of the volume in
which they are contained.

This MS. is decidedly an interesting one, fur it has acutious
similarity to the Amani version, and may stand in some relation to
it, although it does not agree with that MS. in every respect. On
the title page we read 2-

ιι Codex Colbertin 153. Regius 33:63,

With regard to the former mark, I can but surmise that it is an
allusion to the library of the renowned Jean Baptiste Colbert,
which would indicate that the MSS. were in their present con-
dition certainly earlier than the end of the 17th century3 the
latter note merely reminds us that the Bibliothdque Nationale was

 

