INTRODUCTION xv

written across the whole page. The inl< is fresher and stronger3
the siae, too, of the folios is quite different to that of the
’ other portions of the volume. Whilst the size of folios 931-
1281 is 290 x an average of 175 millimetres, the other folios
are all 290 κ 210 millimetres, and even the similarity in the length
of the page is due entirely to the work of the binder, who has
trimmed the top edges.

This valuable collection is described as “ Ex libris Monasterii
B. Maria de Lyra in Normania.”

I am disposed to think that this statement tends to throw light
on the different style of this document, and may also account for
the elaborate capital letters which decorate its pages. None of the
other versions are so sumptuous as this, for those that were produced
in the early days, before the Chapter of Paris, were F ranciscan
versions, and, therefore, simple ones, while any which would be
in use, or even in possession, among the Order after the Chapter of
Paris, in 1264, would be both of small compass and as simple as
possible in order to 'avoid detection, since at that council the
following terrible decision had been arrived at,a decision all the 2
more drastic because of the enormous sense of authority and
ohedience which existed in the Order :—

“Item precepit Generale Capitulum per obedientiam quod

omnes legendae de B. Francisco olim factae deleantur
et ubi inveniri poterant extra ordinem ipsas fratres
studeant amovere, cum illa legenda quae facta est per
Generalem sit compilata prout ipse habuit ah ore illorum
quicum B. Francisco quasi semper fuerunt et cuncta
certitudinaliter sciverint et probata ibi sint posita
diligenter.⁷’

The Abbaye de Lyre, a monastery not far from Evreux,
was well known in the 14th and 15th centuries, and we
are aware that it received much encouragement from the ·
English Sovereigns, to whom the country then belonged. This
monastery was extremely rich in manuscripts, and was renowned
for its copyists. As, however, it was not a Franciscan buta
Benedictine community, it was extra ordinem, and so did not
come under the authority of the decisions of the Chapter Genera]
of 1264. Hence its elaborate form.

Interesting, however, as this MS. undoubtedly is, it hardly ranlrs
’ as precious from the point of view ofa good text, it adds practi-
cally nothing to any effort to amend textual errors, in which

 

