xviii THOMAS OF CELANO

“Tractatus sancti Bernardi super Magnificat.
Meditationes sancti Bernardi.
Vita sancti Francisci.
Quaestiones sancti Augustini ad Oros.'-’

'- 5⁷³ On the paper outsidethe vellum sheets are to be seen the follow-
,Α ing press marks 1-

34A- 8113

47·
On the opposite page are the quaint lines—
Unde veneris et e‘gubcsce

“Cogita Ubi sis et ingemisce
Quo vadis ct contremisce.''

At the bottom of the page occurs a name which would appear to
be “T. Darcie‚’'· followed by the word “ Lumley ” just heneath it.

This fact gives us some indication of the history of these MSS.

, Lord Lumley, who died in 1607, had been a great collector ol

books and MSS. 3 so much so, that soon after his death most of his
library was bought by James I. for his son, the Princo of wales,
and this formed the foundation of the “ Royal Library‚’' which was
ultimately given by King George ΙΙΙ, to the nation, and thus
became the property of the British Museum. It is likely
that some portions at least of the MSS. we are examining were
collected by Lord Lumley‚ but that either by accident or by
arrangement they did not become part of the collection purchased
by the King, for we known that they came into the possession
of the British Museum soon after the death of Lord Harley
(Earl of onom), and were not part of the royal gift. ’

The collection of books in the possession of Lord Harley
was a very valuable one, principally due to the enterprise and
enthusiasm of his librarian, Humphrey Wanley, a man of great
powers, who was in constant correspondente with all parts of the
Continent, and was always receiving books and MSS. from thence.

ltseems to me probahle that theMS.,No. 3 of this volume, entitled
Vita St. Francisci, had been in the possession of Lord Lumley, and
that ior some reason or other it either found its way out of the
Royal Library or was purchased by Humphrey Wanley from the
residue of Lord Lumley's books nearly 100 years later. The
other MSS. also having been secured by him, we may surmise
that, in accordance with Wanley’s favourite practice, he had the

 

