x THOMAS OF CELANO

Doubtless during the next few years further discoveries may come

a to light which will perhaps modify our present views3 but in the

meantime we shall be at least doing something to facilitate further

research if we place on record the present stage of knowledge with

respect to the writings of the chief biographer of St. Francis, Brother
Thomas of Celano.

Of the writer himself comparatively little is known3 but in
spite of this fact, there is apparentlya sufficiency of detail to have
led writers on the subject to divide themselves into two camps.

The one party, which number amongst its adherents the
orthodox Roman writers, is led by the able and polemic editor
of the Miscellaara Francisrana3 it recognises in Thomas of
Celano the true and only exponent of the life of St. Francis. The
other party, whose leader seems to be one who to my mind deserves
the most respectful consideration of every scholar and student,
Professor Paul Sabatier, is tending in irs views towards the
opinion that in our author we have a man of weak character and
one easily led, the tool of the dominant party, and in fact a man
who was almost unscrupulous in his ostringa

Between these two extreme views we have to choose, and this
choice will he best effected hya critical examination of the writings

l which are offered for the first time to British readers as emanating
3-hhfrom an English source.

Something, indeed, of Celano's life and character may be
gathered from a careful perusal of his writings; but there are other
sources of information, and from those we learn that he was of
noble birth, whilst M. Sabatier suggests that he may have been the
son of Thomas, Count of Celano, alluded to by Ryccardi.

Of his early life we know nothing 3 the great works, however,
which he has left behind him show that his education‚ for those
days, was of no mean order. He has a wonderful command of
words, a graceful diction, a clear idea of method, and a remarkable
tendency towards antithesis in his writings, whilst his power of
vivid description is strongly marked.

He was drawn to offer himself as a member of the great
F ranciscan brotherhood, either from an admiration for its principles
or more probably in consequence of his having experienced the
power of St. Francis, who healed him of some sickness frorn
which he was suffering. He tells us, too, that he was one of the
inmates of the New Community house at Bologna called “The
House of the Brothers,” which St. Francis ordered to be evacuated,
and from which even the sick (of whom Celano himself was one)

 

