xvi THOMAS OF CELANO

it abounds¹ I had considerable difficulty in obtaining photo-
graphs of it, in consequence of the Mayor being far from willing
to accord me any assistance in the matter. Ι have, however, to
thank M. Lambert, the librarian, for his courtesy; and, in
consequence of that kindness, I was able to secure, though with
difficulty, specimens of the text of Evreux, which, together with
photographic reproductions of each of the other texts, I shall have
the greatest pleasure in showing to any student of Franciscan
writings.

3. Heidelberg MS-This MS, I believe, has as yet never been
mentioned or used in any collation. The later writers on
Franciscan subjects seem to have been unaware of its existence.
Yet it is certainly one of the earlier versions of the Legenda Gregorii.
It was probably written not later than the commencement of the
14th century. The work in which it appears must have been
bound about that time, as is indicated by the writing on the
inside of the cover.

The MS. is catalogued under Thomas (de Celano), and so has,
doubtless, escaped the watchful eye of Franciscan students,
excepting, of course, those of Frere Edouard d'Alenpon, who, on
this subject, has no compeer.

It was with the greatest difficulty that I was able to find it, for
the authorities at the University Library, after searching, assured
me that there was no MS, either of the Life of St. Francis, or by
Gelono, in their possession. I was told that it must be at Rome.
Iwas determined not to have travelled to Heidelberg in vain, and
so proceeded to carefully examine the long catalogue of those books
which had been removed from Heidelberg to Rome, and having
made quite sure that the MS. I was in search of was not contained
in that list,I further examined the Heidelberg catalogue of 3000
MSS, and, on coming to “T,'' at last discovered the work Ι was
in search of. Thanks to the courtesy of Professor Dr. Wille, the
chief librarian, I was able to collate the MS. in great comfort, as
well as to photograph it. Dr. Wille informs me that hence-
forward the catalogues will contain a cross reference in the case of
this MS, so that future students will have no difficulty in discovering
it. Its present description is “Sal. IX. 243² ’

The volume in which this version of Celano’s work is contained

rs a thick quarto volume of 180 vellum folios. The whole, con-
taining five different documents, is bound in vellum over wooden
boards, which, in the lapse of time, have become worm-caten, while
one of the two ancient brass clasps has disappeared. On the inside

 

