xxx THOMAS OF CELANO

Once more we notice that the Chronicles of the XXIV.
Generals informs us that the life written at the direction of John
of Parma contained “the miracles? whilst Salemhene speaking of
the “Pulcherrimus Liber,’' containing both the miracles and the
life, was entitled “Memoriale Beatae Francisci in desiderio
animae.’'

The title page to the Assisi MS, which bears the inscription
“Memoriales Francisci in desiderio animae‚” obviously inserted
by alater hand, may have had the endorsement placed there under a
misapprehension‚ for the title within the text, which is genuine,
reads somewhat differently, viz.¹ “Memoriale in desiderio anime
de gestis et verbis sanctissimi patris nostri Francisci.’'

The shortening of this in a later version would not unnatur-
ally be, “ Memoriale beati Francisci in desiderio anime.''

Since, however, the Assisi Codex does not contain a tractate
on the miracles nor on the canonization, it cannot be the work to
which Salimbene allodes

Scholars were sor years face to face with this perplexing tangle
of evidences‚ when, in 1898, Professor Paul Sabatier noticed that a
certain MS. in the library at Assisi contained a page that seemed to
have no bearing upon the other sheets.

After careful study‚ he came to the conclusion that the page
of MS. 338 of Assisi was apage of the long-lost Miracles of
Thomas of celano, written about 1257. Students, too, were con-
stantly coming across extracts in the later writers of what seemed
to them the lost version of the Miracles of St. F rancis.

The excitement and perplexity increased, when suddenly the
clue was discovered.

Father Louis Antoine de Porrentruy purchased ata sale of
the library oi the late Prince Β. Boncompagnia MS. en-
titled in the catalogue Mermadalis gestorum et virtutum sancti
Francisci.

On careful examination it proved to be a14th century MS.
which had originally belonged to a certain Signor Pietro Girometti,
and in his library had been No. 16. The Boncompagni MS. is on
74 sheets of vellum, 188 χ 132 millimetres.

The outside of this MS. is in extremely had condition, and con-
sists of boards covered with leather‚ of which the back cover has
been tom off and generally roughly used. On the front cover the
number 49 in red figures appears, relating no doubt to the library
from which it was purchased.

The writing has been carried out by two copyists, the first 39

 

