xxvi THOMAS OF CELANO

Peregrinus and Theodora), and ending with 258 lines of poetry
entitled “Epithalamium Christi virginum alternatis ”3 folios90-105
contain the Vita St. Francisci.

These folios are in excellent preservation and are by far the
most beautifully written of all the manuscripts. Each folio measures
320x216 millimetres. The writing is in two columns of 42 lines
each. The rubrications are lilce those of the British Museum copy,
and there are also side rubrical notes or titles. It is unfortunate
that this version is incomplete, terminating as it does in the
middle of par. 4of Book IL, for we are thus only in possession of
a little over two-thirds of the original text. Dr. Kerler, the chief
librarian, who at great personal inconveniente attended at the
library when it would otherwise have been closed, in order to give ·
me the opportunity of collating the text without undue delay,
permitted me to have the text photographed, and the result is
extremely good, and indicates the clearness of the writing. It
is, however, necessary to say that the edition contains some folios
in a different hand, which are directly the opposite as regards style.
I have been unable to trace the history of this Codex, but it carne
into the possession of the Wiirzburg Library when the secularisation
of the monasteries took place at the commencement of the last
century. lam disposed to group it with that of London, Oxford
and Heidelberg.

Such, then, are the versions at present known of the first
life of St. Francis by Thomas of Celano, entitled Legenda
Gregorii, though it might be well to include under this head-
ing as No. 10 the Rinaldi-Amoni version as being the repro-
duction of the lost version of Fallerone, and as version 11 the Vita
Prima, which the Bollandists have given us in Aba, October 11,
pp. 683, etc, for this may be taken as representing the MSS. which
has by some curicus means disappeared from the Abbey of Long-
pont.

tf these be admitted, the list includes eleven versions, each of
which has its own particular interest, but all of which are so nearly
alike as to raise no doubts about the authenticityof each and all, and
to place the Legend ej Gregory, or, as it has been sometimes called
the Vita Prima, on very sure ground.

Passing from these texts, we enter upon thorny ground, for we
are face to face with accounts whose variations are most perplexing.

In the Chronica of Brother Jenrdainas af Giano, published or
at least written in 1262, which has been reproduced in a most careful

 

