INTRODUCTION xxi

the reference may he seen is the newly-published catalogue of the
United Cistercian Libraries, and this particular volume is Codex 48,
Ossegg. It consiste of 225 folios of thick German paper, with rough
edges(of which the watermark is unknown to those who are expett
in this branch of study), the last page being in bad condition.

The first 19 folios are missing3 the rest of the contents are
as follows :—

F. 20-83. Nova passionalis.

F. 83-84. Portion of the Apocrypha (incomplete).

F. 85-181. Secunda pars novis passionalis (Lives of the
Saints).

F. 182. Last page of the Life of St. Bernard.

F. 183-194. The Sufferings of Christ.

F. 195. Blank sheet.

F. rob-204. Vision of an lrish soldier.

F. 204-205. Quaestiones variae.

F. zob-225. Vita Sancti Francisci.

The catalogue suggests, as the date of the MSS. the 14th century,
but a casual perusal will convince the student that the work must
have been either earlier or later. Accepting the date, however, as
being early in the 15th century, we are face to face with a docu-
ment of considerable interest. It is at once obvious that the
Ossegg MS. must be placed in a totally different category to those
which are written on parchment. The writing is not in the usual
Gothic hand, but is that which is known as “ charter hand’' of the
German type, whilst the rubrical headings are badly formed Gothic
letters. The fact that paper is used and other circumstances ple·
vents the assumption that this could have been Celano’s original
text, a document which we have every reason to suppose must still
be in existence, but the heading,

“Sancti spiritus assit nobis gratia in nomine, etc.
Qui dat principium det nobis tangere finem,''

might lead the reader to believe that this manuscript must have
been written by other than a mere copyist, while the fact that
Celano spent so rnuch of his time in Germany would tend to make
us look for specimens of his work in those parts of Germany con·
tignous to the great waterways such as the river Elhe.

· Again, it is a curicus fact that Rinaldi’s version seems to have
been-partly drawn from this text, and it seems to me incredible that
he should not have seen it. ln fact, it is the only Codex that con-

 

