INTRODUCTION ni

were compelled to depart at once. Possibly he may have been
brought into contact with St. Francis in the course of the latter’s
return journey from Spain to Assisi,

In the year 1221, six years after his admission to the Order‚ he
was selected by Brother Caesar of Spyer to accompany him into
Germany.

The good opinion which St. Francis himself had formed of him
was evidently confirmed by that of Brother Caesar, who, on his
return to Italy in 1223, nominated Thomas of Celano “Minister
Provincial’⁷ ed interim, or until a new “Minister Provincial’' should
arrive.

It would be a matter of considerable interest were we able to
ascertain exactly what was the next step in his career, but we can
at present only surmise.

Of this, however, we may be almost sure, viz, that Brother
Thomas of Celano was at Assisi before the death of St. Francis, for
if we are to credit his own statement (Legenda Antiqua, ΙΙ. irim), he
was present during the last illness of the founder of the Order, and
obtained from him the much-prized habit, which, as he tells us, he
carried later on into Germany, doubtless on his return to his post
in those parts.

After this he would seem to have been from time to time at Assisi,
possibly in order to collect the materials for his works, for it is clear
that, both in 1228, the date of the canonization of St. Francis, and
in 1230, he was at the centre of Franciscan interests.

ln 1229 he had written his first great work containing the
life of St. Francis, and concluding with alist of his miracles, and
this was duly forwarded to the Pope, Gregory IX, together with
a coveting letter which commeneed, “Actus et vitam beatissimi
patris nostri Francisci,’⁷ etc. This first effert has always been
associated with the name of the Pope to whom it was sent, and is
known as the Legenda Gregorii.

The weight of such a name behind it must have given this first
hiographya position 01 unwonted importance, and it is cudent, from
the number uf copies still extant, that its circulation could not have
been confined to the communities belonging to the Franciscan
Order. Wherever the preaching brotherhood went, for at least
ten and possibly for twenty years after its publication, they would
wish to carry with them the authoritative life of their rounder,
whilst those high-placed divines, who, as we know, in large numbers
joined the Order, would take care to have reproduced, at least fur
their own use, an authentic copy of the life of St. Francis, lt is

 

