INTRODUCTION xrrvii

manner in the Analecta Franciseana, the writer mentions Thomas
of Celano, and says of him, “Qui legendam sancti Francisci et
primam et secundam, postea conscripsit.”

In the second place we are compelled to notice that Bernard de
Bessa, in his Liber de Laudibus, written at the end of the 13th
century, whilst speaking os various biographies, mentions the first
life by celano, but though he again and again makes use of the
Assisi text (generally known as the second life of St. Francis
byCelano),he never accords it aword of mention as being a second
life. Why?

Thirdly, in the Clrrear'eles af the XXIV. Geaerals, we meet
with this curious sentence. The author is speaking of the Legend
os tlte Three Campaniam, written under the generalship of Cre-
scentius de Jesu (1244-1247) and says :-“Et post, frater Thomas
de Celano de mandato eiusdem ministri et generalis capituli, primum
tractatum Legendae beati F rancisci, devita scilicetet verbis et
intentione eius circa eaquae pertinent ad regulam, compilavit ; quae
dicitur Legenda Antiqua. Quae dicto generali et capitulo dirigitur
cum prologo qui incepit. Placuit sancti universitati vestrae,” etc.
The same writer, a little later on, continues, in speaking of John of
Parma, who was Minister-General from 1247 to 1257:-“Hic
generalis praecipit multiplicatis litteris fratri Thomae de Celano,
ut vitam beati Francisci, quae Antiqua Legenda dicitur perficeret
quia solum de eius conversatione et verbis in primo tractatu, de
mandato fratris crescentii generalis praedicti compilato, omissis
miraculis, fecerat mentionem. Et sic secundnm tractatum qui de
ejusdem sancti Patris agit miraculis, compilavit quem cum epistola
quae incipit ‘Religiosa nostra solicitudo’ misit eidem generali.''

lf this were all it might be comparatively easy to form a clear
idea of what had taken place, we should be prepared to assert—
That the writings os Thomas of Celano included a first and second
life; that the first life consisted of the Legenda Gregorii and the
Legenda Antiqua· that the Legenda Antiqua did not contain either
the canonization or the miracles3 that after this, that is, between
1247 and 1257, he wrote the concluding work, the Tractatus
Secnrrdur, containing the account of the miracles, which forms the
second part of this work.

We are not, however, to be allowed to complacently settle this
without a shade of difficulty, for in the Cbranicles es Salirnbeae

j , we read that Crescentius de Jesu, 1244-1247, “precepit fratri

Thome de Celano qui primam legendam beati Francisci fecerat,
vt iterum scriberet alium librum, eo quod multa inveniebantur de

 

