lNTRODUCTlON xix

four MSS, though of very different dates and origin, bound up
together in one of the characteristically beautiful bindings found
in Lord Harley’s library, and the pages trimmed to make them
coincide in size as nearly as possible.

The portion in which we are chiefly interested consists of 43
folios, on the last of which the writing hardly extends to one column.
Every page except the last has two columns, neatly written, with
initial letters and rubrics, each column having 41 lines, and the -
whole page measuring 275 x 190 millimetres.

I am supported by the very valuable opinion of Dr. Warner or
the British Museum in asserting that this MS, like that at Barcelona,
must have been written at a date not far removed from that of the
death of St. Francis in 1226, and certainly not later than the first
half of the 13th century. The simple style of this MS. cannot fail
to give to the student an impression of a very early origin,
whilst the character and qualit y ot the vellum used point clearly

to the absence of means on the part of the scribe, whoever hem

may have been. After careful study of the MS, I have come 44

to the conclusion that this text is by far the purest extant ⁸
and have ur consequence made use of rt, to the very largest
possible extent, in the correction of the text of the Legenda

Gregorii.

It may be that the wish is father to the thought, but both
from the addition to the title and from many other scraps ot
internal evidence, on which I cannot now enter,I am fain to ask
the bold question—May not this MS. have been the original
writing of Thomas of Celano? Perhaps others will give ῑὴίε4
problem their careful consideration.

5. Mentpell' zer l.MS ——This rs to be seen in the Bibliotheque de
L’Ecole de Medicine, Montpellier, and rs MS. No. 30. The folios
which are comprised' m this version form the concluding portion of
an ancient‘ ‘Passionale” The stae of each page is 340 x 440 milli-
metres, written on vellum in two columns of 46 or 47 lines each.
lt is a very early version, and one which it would obviously be safe
to make the basis ofa text, for rt is clear that the manuscripts
which are bound up with this text are of the 12th and 13th
centuries.

Altoget ther, m the volume which bears the' inscription on the
cover of “Passionale Vetus,’' there are about fifty-one different

7 handwritings‚ making 273 folios, including one for the title and
one for the index.

The title-page bears this legend :—

 

